With life getting more demanding and hectic all the time,
it seems there's only one way to cope: multitasking. Gurus
and life hackers make a living telling us how to
get better at it. But can we actually multitask? The
term was first used in the '60s to describe computer
performance. The human brain, though, is not a computer, and
human attention is a very limited resource. Some psychologists model
visual attention as being like a spotlight. It can only
be shone in one direction at any one time. Our
primary focus, what we're paying most attention to, is like
the brightly lit area in the center of the beam.
It can also be understood as being like a zoom
lens. We can choose to narrow our focus to concentrate
in detail or widen it to be aware of more
things simultaneously, but we can't be zoomed in and out
at the same time. Even though we're constantly receiving a
huge amount of information from our senses, it's only possible
for a small amount to make it through to conscious
awareness. Watch the next section very carefully and pay particular
attention to how many balls bounce in the circle.
How many can you count? Seven, right? But did you
also notice that little dinosaur? What about the changing shape
of the circle or the smiley face on one of
the balls? This shows just how powerful focused attention is.
Being able to filter out irrelevant detail is an amazingly
useful tool, but it means we can miss things that
are right under our noses, an effect known as inattention
blindness. You can see this very clearly in the famous
invisible gorilla experiment. When asked to concentrate exclusively on how
often basketball players in white pass the ball, most people
completely miss the gorilla walking across the screen and beating
his chest. We just don't have the capacity to process
everything at once. This is a particular problem when we
try to multitask. We can switch attention from one task
to another and back again, but when attention is overloaded,
we miss things, and the result is nearly always that
we perform tasks less well than we would doing them
one at a time. It's only truly possible to do
two things at once if they require different sets of
cognitive resources. For example, it's totally possible to read a
book and listen to music at the same time, which
would suggest that driving while talking on the phone is
not a problem as long as it's a hands-free phone.
It's not that simple, though. Research has shown that while
talking on the phone, we have a tendency to create
mental images, and this uses the same visual resources needed
for driving. And if visual resources become too stretched, it's
perfectly possible for a driver to look directly at a
hazard but, just like with that little dinosaur, fail to
see it. Not everything will make it through to conscious
awareness. So multitasking makes us at best inefficient and at
worst downright dangerous. If you're feeling like you should be
doing seventeen things at once, remember, that's just not the
way your brain is wired. Thanks for
watching. Don't forget to subscribe and click the bell to
receive notifications for new videos. See you again soon.